battlestar(6) is an game written by "His Lordship, Admiral David W.
Horatio Riggle." It is an adventure game not unlike adventure(6)
(yes, that's a pun). His Lordship claims it to be less of a puzzle
and more of an exploration-game. Apparently he wrote it to learn C
better (the game was written in 1979, however, so we are still
talking about pre-ANSI C with its weird function declarations and the
like). It also has some interesting verbs like "fuck" (unfortunately
performing that on corpses and general population does not lead to
results all that interesting). But that's not all! battlestar(6) is
not "just" an adventure game: It also has what I can only describe as
"action segments!"

All that sounds pretty neat. Considering that adventure(6) has a small
collective that managed through a lot of research and collaboration
find every one of the game's secrets, so should battlestar(6)...
Except it doesn't! The game is actually worse at teaching the player
how to play than adventure(6) is, and there don't appear to be any
walkthroughs on the internets. The only way I managed to complete the
game was by consulting the source code. So, for the first time ever
I am writing a walkthrough.

For a bit of clarification: I started playing battlestar(6) on Void
Linux and consulted the same sources as the ones from which the games
are compiled on Void (which, I think, are *not* Debian's and are
written in bronze-age (pre-ANSI) C (but I might be mis-remembering)).
Later my life returned to normal somewhat and I continued playing on
OpenBSD. For that purpose I downloaded the source tree via CVS and
observed that the games have been rewritten somewhat, mostly
stylistically, however: adventure(6)'s main.c still is written in the
kind of style that used to infuriate Dijkstra etc.

Oh, but what even is a battlestar? Well, I was wondering that as
well. Apparently at about the same time (1978) there used to exist
one of those very cheap, uninspired and horribly dull American
television-space-shows called "battlestar Galactica". By "battlestar"
the authors, of course, meant a sort of space-carrier-ship because
the meaning is so "obvious". The premise of the series, as far as
there is one, is that a very advanced human civilisation lives on
some far-away planets, waging war against some robots called
"cylons", whose dearest wish it seems to be to murder every man alive
for no reason at all. Of course, the character I shall refer to as
"Judas Iscariot" assists the robots in doing so on the condition that
they spare his home-planet Guatemala (not what they called it, but I
have bad memory for things that are somehow nonsensical, yet
uninspired) and install him as its president. Genocide is something a
lot of very resourceful people have failed to achieve on a lesser
scale after decades of constant work, yet the robots desecrate 99% of
human population in just a few hours. The other 1% is divided in
half: 0.5% is left to starve to death, while the lucky few fly in the
general direction of the earth, where we, their very primitive
brethren live. Naturally, the robots at first try to execute Judas
Iscariot after killing every single other Guatemalan, but then decide
to instead put him in command of an entire fleet with the sole
purpose of pursuing these space-gypsies. It's much more boring than
it sounds like.

And what does any of it has to do with the game? Well, not much. The
player starts on a "battlestar" that features smaller spacecrafts
called "vipers", and then goes into space where there are a bunch of
"cylons" to kill, but that's about it.


WALKTHROUGH

So, first thing to do is to open the file words.c in the source code
and find all the VERBS. Now actually start the game.

The game starts at a LUXURIOUS STATEROOM. We check our inventory and
see the following:

	>-: i
	You aren't carrying anything.

	You are wearing:

		pajamas

	You are in perfect health.
	>-:

(Some time after my first session I noticed that the prompt looks a
bit like a sad face.)

Oh, and, yes, we'll be completing most of the game in a pyjama, so I
suggest making an alias like `alias hitchhiker=battlestar'.

If we go back we will discover some royal robes, which we can
put on instead, however they don't appear to have any effect
whatsoever (no, really, "grep 'ROBE|PIJAMA' *.c" yourself), so
instead we shall go right.

From the EXECUTIVE SUITES we can go in all six directions.

Ahead is the MAID'S UTILITY ROOM. Unfortunately, the maid has
accidentally stabbed herself to the death with a knife! We take the
knife, leaving the body for the police, and go back.

To the right is the PRESIDENTIAL SUITE. It has a laser pistol just
lying on the floor, so we take that. If we go ahead we can discover
that the president too has accidentally shot himself to death, so
instead we go back.

Down at the FIRST CLASS LOUNGE we discover some rubble and matches.
There is not much to see at the back, so we go up.

We could go up to get another knife and a cleaver, but we already
have a knife! So instead we go ahead to the bridal suite.

In the BRIDAL SUITE we put on a strange amulet that we found lying on
the floor and go down.

In the HALLWAY there area a bunch of coins, which we take and go
right and ahead.

From the MAIN HANGAR we can go left, up or right.

The only thing of interest on the left is a nuclear warhead.
Unfortunately, all possible interactions with it may or may not
result in the player's death, so we won't be going left.

Up and right actually lead to the same locations. We go right twice.
There are two guards "guarding" something called "Viper," but they
don't seem to mind us launching too much.

At this point the game prints a very helpful message:

	>-: launch
	You climb into the viper and prepare for launch.
	With a touch of your thumb the turbo engines ignite, thrusting you back into
	your seat.

		You are in space.


	>-:

So, what is "space" exactly? Well...

	...
	/* 32 */
	{"You are in space.",
		{33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 1, 33, 1},
	"****\n", {0} },
	/* 33 */
	{"You are in space.",
		{38, 32, 39, 40, 41, 1, 42, 1},
	"****\n", {0} },
	/* 34 */
	{"You are in space.",
		{32, 44, 45, 46, 47, 1, 48, 1},
	"****\n", {0} },
	/* 35 */
	{"You are in space.",
		{40, 45, 49, 32, 50, 1, 51, 1},
	"****\n", {0} },
	...

This is all part of a struct room (two of them technically), which is
defined in extern.h:

	struct room {
		const char   *name;
		int     link[8];
	#define north	link[0]
	#define south	link[1]
	#define east	link[2]
	#define west	link[3]
	#define up	link[4]
	#define access	link[5]
	#define down	link[6]
	#define flyhere	link[7]
		const char   *desc;
		unsigned int objects[NUMOFWORDS];
	};

So, right off, flyhere and access are useless when trying to draw
some sort of a map. Miraculously there are north, south, east and
west in space, but we are yet to invent a space-proof compass. But
first of all: which point of space are we even in? Well...

	$ grep ^launch\( *
	command6.c:launch()
	$ less command6.c
	...

Oh, but of course, we are at location[position].up! Also known as 32.
So, knowing that rooms 32-66 are all space, it appears that other
options include: 67 and 68, corresponding to the orbits of a small
blue planet and a tropical planet. The first leads to 69, and while
it is, as the user of an internet forum would put it, "nice," I
wouldn't go somewhere described as:

	...
	{69, 69, 69, 69, 69, 1, 69, 1},
	...

So instead we'll try to navigate to the tropical planet. This,
thankfully is much more straightforward than the labyrinths of
adventure(6) our path is 32-34-44-64-66-68, or s-s-s-s-s-s --
basically, we just need to find that mysterious "space south."
Throughout these space rooms there are also some objects called
CYLON, being in one cell with a CYLON triggers the function visual(),
which produces a visual fight with the alien. I know that on this
path the only CYLON is in the room 64, which we can use to determine
which direction is south (it's right because by typing `r' once and
`a' twice I arrive at a CYLON).

So, how about defeating the CYLON? Well, turns out that this is a
curses game as well (of course it is!), and I don't really know how
to use curses. Anyway, before starting the fight, I'd make sure that
the terminal being fought on is 80x24, because that will make things
much simpler. Right, I don't think I can put off reading fly.c any
more because the in-game prompts are most unhelpful.

So, the first thing to do is to press plus (`+'). This will draw a
target in the middle of the screen. Our objective is to bring the
enemy (looks like `/-\') there and press `f' or space to fire. Of
course we can't move the enemy, but we can move ourselves by pressing
h/r, l, j/u and k/d along with their capitalised versions for greater
effect. This is the hardest part of the game!

Save once the game says "You are orbiting a tropical planet." Go
down, approaching an island. This is the main part of the game.

At this point you are free to explore the island, which is the main
part of the game. Completing it is very tricky, however. A sequence
that seems to work:

1. Firstly, it is very important to find the goddess. If not found,
she will disappear after the first day. Once the goddess is found you
need to kiss her, follow her, kiss her a few more times and finally
love her. She will drop a medallion. DON'T take it (now at least).

2. Find a woman who'll tell you that she wants to meet you in the
gardens at midnight. Once there and then, accept a rope from her.

3. Otherwise explore the island. You should at least find the potion
before the rendezvous.

4. Quickly go to the catacombs. They are only open at night, so there
is no time to lose.

5. There are mainly three points of interest here: the sepulchre, the
room with the dark lord (a.k.a. darth vader) and a storage room. The
latter contains a grenade, which is quite honestly not that
interesting of an item. The sepulchre is more interesting: it
contains a mail shirt, an armoured helmet and a sword. It is vital to
go into the final fight wearing (not carrying) mail, the helmet, the
rope and carrying (not wearing) the sword, the laser, the potion
and the amulet.

6. In the last room before Darth Vader make sure to sleep and eat if
carrying food and a knife. Enter with the aforementioned items and
smite the enemy until you deal him 34 points of damage (see below on
the explanation of the fight mechanic). Then retreat by typing `b'.
He'll take your amulet and retreat. Follow him. Now smite him until
you deal him 25 points of damage and finish him off by shooting. At
this point you will most likely have so many injuries you won't be
able to do anything, which is why we brought the potion. Drink it to
restore your health. There'll be some treasures lying around. We just
want to take the amulet, the talisman and throw the rope up to
escape. Once on the surface (you'll need to climb there with command
`u') use amulet -- that'll teleport you outside of the canyon.

7. Finally return to the nymph and give her the amulet and the
talisman. Follow some further instructions.


COMBAT

I already touched the space-combat briefly and there is not much more
to explain. Ground-combat is a bit stranger. There are three types of
enemies: woodsmen, elves and Darth Vader. All that should be known
about the first two is that carrying a laser and typing `shoot' puts
a swift end to the affair. The dark lord is more complicated than
that.

There are several things to keep in mind when a fight starts: the
type of enemy, his strength, your tiredness, your injuries, the sort
of weapon carried, wearing one or several of the medallion, the
amulet and the talisman, and wearing mail and helmet and carrying
the shield.

There are several things that can be done on each turn: smiting,
shooting going back and managing inventory. I advise to go into
fights with the inventory already managed.

The enemy's strength determines two things: how many times will he
have to be smitten before he dies and how many times will he have to
be smitten before he may be killed through shooting instead of having
your laser deflected and destroyed. It is, essentially "health
points" and they are opposed to the value of lifeline, which
indicates how many "damage points" has the enemy suffered. The dark
lord starts with 100 strength the first time and 75 the second time.

With each round of the fight you become more tired. If you are
sufficiently tired, the enemy simply kills you.

injuries is an array of 13, that determines what parts of your body
are injured and how much. Each turn a number between 0 and 12 is
generated in order to determine which part of your body the enemy
will try to injure. The following items each reduce that number by
1: helmet (worn), mail (worn) and shield (held). Similarly for
each of the amulet, the medallion and the talisman being worn the
number is increased by 1. Should the number be less than 0 it becomes
0, equally it won't exceed 12. The injuries 10, 11 and 12 are
particularly important: they correspond to the deep incisions,
fractured skull and broken neck. Should these three injuries happen
at the same time you'll die, which is why it is so important to wear
at least some protective gear, which can make one or several of these
injuries impossible.

Aside from the laser there are three kinds of weapons in this game
the first is the two-handed sword, the second is the normal sword and
the broadsword, the third is everything else. The two-handed sword is
the most damaging, however it is impossible to carry almost anything
else together with it (laser, importantly), so I am avoiding it. A
sword is lying not far from Darth Vader together with mail and a helmet,
so we'll use that.

The damage dealt is calculated slightly differently depending on the
type of weapon. For sword it is:

	rnd(50) % (WEIGHT - carrying) - card(injuries, NUMOFINJURIES)
	    - encumber - exhaustion.

It's mostly self-explanatory. Depending on how much damage was dealt
one of the following messages will be displayed:

0:
	You swung wide and missed.
	He checked your blow. CLASH! CLANG!
	His filthy tunic hangs by one less thread.
1:
	He's bleeding.
	A trickle of blood runs down his face.
	A huge purple bruise is forming on the side of his face.
5:
	He staggers back quavering.
	He jumps back with his hand over the wound.
	His shirt falls open with a swath across the chest.
10:
	A bloody gash opens up on his left side.
	A bloody gash opens up on his right side.
	The steel bites home and scrapes along his ribs.
	You pierce him, and his breath hisses through clenched teeth.
20:
	You smite him to the ground.
	The force of your blow sends him to his knees.
	Clutching his blood-drenched shirt, he collapses, stunned.
30:
	His ribs crack under your powerful swing, flooding his ...
55:
	You shatter his upheld arm in a spray of blood.  The blade ...
	With a mighty lunge the steel slides in, and gasping, he ...

Shooting the enemy will instantly kill him if his strength minus the
damage you've dealt already is less than or equal to 50. Otherwise
he will deflect and destroy your laser.

Going back is quite interesting. Normally it prints how far you've
got in the fight and you retreat back. Of course, the next time the
fight starts none of the displayed stats will matter. It is, however,
necessary to retreat during the first fight with Darth Vader. If
you've managed to deal him 34 (or maybe 33 since it involves
floating-point arithmetic) points of damage, while wearing or
carrying the amulet and try to go back he will either:

1. Trigger a game-over in case you also have the medallion on you.
2. Fracture your skull and retreat with your amulet. Afterwards you
can follow him, which is the only way to get into the room with the
talisman.

Hopefully that explains the combat system.


FINAL BUG/FEATURE

Now one would think that this plan I've outlined of defeating the
dark lord and saving the day would be some sort of a guarantee. Well,
no, it still relies quite heavily on random numbers being in the
player's favour. I have, however, found a -bug- feature thanks to
which completing this game doesn't even require a laser, or a
two-handed sword. You see, you've got to follow the dark lord after
he cowardly retreats and then fall back yourself. The author seems
to have "forgotten" (actually he's probably just left cheats for
himself!) to account for that final fight in the fight() function.
The logic there depends somewhat on your previous position, so there
are two ways it may go: either you and all the items remain in the
same room, or you, the amulet and the talisman are transported
somewhere else. Either way, all that remains to do is to navigate to
the nymph.


OTHER TIPS

While flying, it is easy to return back to the original location on
the island by simply following a `u' with a `d'. It is, however,
somewhat dangerous at night, as yet another cylon will be spawned
just above the planet.

After you return to the goddess, collect the medallion and go to
another room. You will become a wizard! (If you still have the other
two on you.) This gives you the ability to type the magic word `su'
and to fly without an aeroplane.


ENDING

So, I realise not all people consider such feats of exploration worth
their time, therefore I finally leave the game's ending here.

>-: give amulet to goddess
amulet:
Given.
>-: give talisman to goddess
talisman:
Given.
>-: give medallion to goddess
medallion:
Given.
The powers of the earth are now legitimate.  You have destroyed the Darkness
and restored the goddess to her throne.  The entire island celebrates with
dancing and spring feasts.  As a measure of her gratitude, the goddess weds you
in the late summer and crowns you Prince Liverwort, Lord of Fungus.

But, as the year wears on and autumn comes along, you become restless and
yearn for adventure.  The goddess, too, realises that the marriage can't last.
She becomes bored and takes several more natives as husbands.  One evening,
after having been out drinking with the girls, she kicks the throne particularly
hard and wakes you up.  (If you want to win this game, you're going to have to
shoot her!)
>-: shoot goddess
The blast catches the goddess in the stomach, knocking her to the ground.
She writhes in the dirt as the agony of death taunts her.
She has stopped moving.

You win!


Copyright (c) 2023 Alexander Arkhipov <aa@alearx.org>
Licensed under CC BY (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)
