I am quite partial to the games "fallout" 1 and 2, as I grew up
playing mostly those and some strategy games. So I was very happy to
find out one day that the second game has been mostly successfully
reverse-engineered and ported to sdl as [fallout2-ce]. Whilst the
memories are still fresh, I will here attempt to summarise my first
experience with the port.


INSTALLATION

So, my first question was "ok, but does it compile on OpenBSD?" Well,
it does. Quite well in fact. The project uses cmake, for which the
author gets -15 karma. Initially compilation failed, I suspected some
lacking linking flags to be the culprit. Googling a bit I found how
to force cmake to actually print commands it uses, rather than just
uselessly report errors, and found that just as I suspected the
command lacked -L/usr/local/lib. It took me a bit more googling after
which I found out that I can set this flag by running cmake with
-DCMAKE_EXE_LINKER_FLAGS=-L/usr/local/lib. There weren't any
compilation errors afterwards and the game ran quite well after I put
the binary into the game's root directory and launched it as
`./fallout2-ce' (so the pwd is the game's directory).

There turned out to be some problems with the data files then.
Firstly I had to change f2_res.ini a bit so that the window does as
little damage to my system as possible: I set WINDOWED to 1, and
later SCR_WIDTH to 640 and SCR_HEIGHT to 480. There still were some
problems with the mouse, however, to fix which I had to restart the
game. Also I noticed that the music sometimes would play, and
sometimes wouldn't. To fix that I made sure that all files and
directories mentioned in fallout2.cfg are named exactly as they are
mentioned there and also made four copies of all files in
sound/music: all-lowercase, all-uppercase, upper before period and
upper after period (e.g. 01hub.acm got copied to 01HUB.ACM, 01HUM.acm
and 01hub.ACM). The reason being, of course that somehow caseless
fopen is not yet implemented in this program. Also it later turned
out that one of the maps in addition to mixing case randomly has a
typo, so I copied 13carvrn.acm to 13carvrvn.acm. I vaguely remember
there being no music in the area in the original, but I often skip
Redding anyway, so perhaps its just a local "feature".


NEW CHARACTER

I played a jinxed character once on normal difficulty without
investing much into armour class and ultimately ended up not liking
it. This time I thought "but what if I play on easy and invest as
much as possible into AC?" Well, this way it actually turned out to
be pretty fun up to and including New Reno, but I rushed the rest of
the game. The character was like this:

        age: 33
	gender: male
	name: Dr. Scar (after the lion king character)
	attributes: 1 luck and charisma, the rest is mostly even
	traits: jinxed, heavy bruiser
        tags: doctor (useful), lockpick (less useful), steal (which I
            thought to be funny)

The idea is to get HtH evade and tag unarmed once it can be boosted
to 300 thus. I decided that my character should be a somewhat chaotic
force, neither strictly evil, nor very righteous: I'd for instance
become a slaver, but would then help Modoc instead of slaughtering
some innocent farmers.

My disappointment was almost immediate, as I noticed that for some
reason none of the giant ants ever seemed to crit miss, but they did
crit hit for 0 damage quite a lot. Found the issue pretty quickly and
spent the weekend reviewing the rest of the file. Fixed some other
bug, sent the diff to the owner. Now my fixes are part of the engine.


THE BEGINNING

After that I decided to actually do Arroyo for once, instead of
immediately wondering in the general direction of the GECK.
Slaughtered a more-than-reasonable amount of the templar fauna and
actually kicked Cameron's butt instead of stealing the key from him.
I think I might have ended up poisoned with 1 health, however, so my
next stop was Hakunin's tent. Attempted refusing the main quest, had
to take it anyway, didn't respect the shaman, completed all local
quests available to me, went east to Klamath.

At Klamath I talked to Ardin: told her how sad I am about Smiley, but
didn't offer to help. Instead went straight to "whisky" Bob, agreeing
to refuel his still; immediately decided it was not worth it and sold
him out to Sajag. Satisfied with myself I told Torr that I'll help
him guard his cows. As soon as two suspicious-looking men offered me
some cash to betray Torr as well, did that. Returning found out that
Torr ran in the least convenient of directions (for him), so I
decided to help him for more money; did just that. With my newfound
wealth I exchanged some of that and half the junk from around the
town for a suit of leather armour. Well-protected I went straight to
the rat-infested part of town to one-hit-kill the rat king. I did, of
course, take the fuel-thingy from the car, but later I decided to
stash it in a container until I can actually use it. I quickly forgot
which one, however, and never managed to install it.

With that I went south to reach the Den. Immediately kicked all the
local children's arses. Took Rebecca's and Lara's quests; tried to
see what the traders have, but wasn't interested. "Got" Rebecca's
money out of Fred, by having him promise to make me a rich man
sometime in the future, but later I had so much money and so little
to spend it on that I forgot about that completely. Found Rebecca's
book. Tyler didn't to believe that I come from Metzger, so I put that
quest off for now. Agreed to destroy Rebecca's still for Frankie. His
whore demanded 1000$ from me, so instead I took "Mom's" quest and
listened to Karl's story. In the slaver's guild I delivered the radio
to Vic. After Metzger still demanded from me as much as that whore at
the Hole, joined the guild instead. After completing the slave runs I
bought Vic's freedom only to have the ungrateful bastard refuse to
follow me. In-between the runs I returned Rebecca her book,
immediately afterwards destroyed her still, delivered his (rather
cold now, I think) dinner to Smitty, completed Lara's quests by
getting Tyler so drunk he told me about his stupid party, and put a
woman's ghost to rest by beating Joey the local punk to the death.
With that I headed in the direction of the Vault City, skipping
Modoc.

I found very few bugs in this section; everything went quite
smoothly.


THE MIDDLE

This is my favourite part of the game. There is quite a lot to do,
usually with many possible solutions, but unlike some late-game
locations these feel much more like real places, rather than game
locations.

Right, so, here is a very deep question to the writers: Valerie the
mechanic of Vault City is a product of Vic fornicating with one of
the female citizens of the city. Contrary to that fact, Phylis the
nurse (or whatever she is) tells us that while the decades
underground after a nuclear war have indeed made the people of the
vault 8 devoid of marital morality, it may very well be due to the
fact that radiation and incest have made them so sterile they are
only able to procreate artificially. Now which one is it?

Arriving to the city I immediately went to the greetings office in
order to be very rude to both officers. After they no longer wished
to talk with me I found a local child's stupid doll so he would tell
me where I can find a wrench. I let my character internally curse Vic
after he'd found out how unhelpful Ed is and proceeded to purchase
advanced leather armour from the trader. I tried to fix the auto-doc,
but failed.

At the front gate I had attempted to get a day pass as a slaver,
found out that I need to actually carry some "slaves" around for them
to believe that, and instead bought a fake citizenship and, extorting
my money back from the seller immediately after the purchase.
Entering the city proper I immediately turned to the bar to get
disappointed that they don't actually sell booze; sold the 20 bottles
I just so happened to be carrying upon my person. At the repair
"shop" I told Valerie to shut up because I already have the tools
she needs. At the library I got some free books, read the declaration
of the human rights, thought to myself "what sort of nonsense is it",
told so to "Thomas Moore" (right, and then the king of Vault City
becomes the head of the church and executes him as part of religious
genocide) and took some quests from the city's military captain. At
the council building I told Lynette that she was stupid for refusing
to inspect my pyjamas, but agreed to do her dirty work so that I can
get into the vault.

Circling Gecko to complete the quest, I entered the town. At Gecko I
discussed humour and games with the local tavern owner and spoke to
Harold, Percy and Skeeter to take their quests. Went back to Vault
City, took my repair kit from Valerie, reported to the security man
and went back to Gecko with a hydroelectric magnetosphere regulator.
Back at Gecko I simply exchanged the repair kit for the car fuel
thingy and repaired the atomic station using the robot. Returning to
the city I looted as much as I could from the vault (one of the doors
got jammed and I decided not to reload) and found out about the vault
15.

It was somewhere during the previous two paragraphs that I discovered
my horrible miscalculation. In the original you can delay picking a
perk for as long as you care: if you don't take one at levels 3, 4
and 5, you'll have 2 perks to pick at level 6. My plan has been to
pick both tag and hth evade somewhere at levels 12-15. Well, it turns
out that the feature got fixed in fallout2-ce: now if you keep
adamantly refusing to pick a perk for 3 levels, you'll end up not
receiving an extra pick. Later I also lost 1 perk by accident: I must
have exited the character menu via the escape key rather than the
"done" button and never noticed it because I decided to stockpile
skill points for the next 3 levels.

I turned west for the Den and decided to actually visit Modoc. I took
Jo's quest, healed Bess' leg, had all of Grisham's cows saved, sold
Bess to Grisham (of course, I never returned for the actual jerky),
went down the well to steal a very minor amount of money. I broke
down all of Rose's doors, bought an over-priced cookie from her, had
her force-feed me with some cows' bollocks. In retaliation for that
abuse I killed her "chicken". I told Cornelius I'll find his watch
and proceeded to descend into the latrine-cave. There I found my
first major bug: I can't remember ever dropping active dynamite in
this cave at it not exploding immediately as I exit (in the original).
Here, however, it would sometimes do the thing, and other times just
keep being "active" in the unexploded cave. I had to reload several
times. Finally I was able to tell Cornelius that Farrell stole his
clock.

At the ghost farm I immediately noticed that the "corpses" are
dummies; after I have fallen through his floor, Vegeir confirmed the
peaceful ways of the mole people. I went back to Jo, telling him how
much of an idiot he and his fellow villagers (the game calls Modoc a
"town", but I am not Yankee enough to call every settlement with 3
families in it a "town") are. There was peace between the starving
people and the mole people. I brought Jonny back to Balthas and
continued towards the Den. There I found Woody, told Karl his
compatriots decided to stop bullying him, got the car and got out. I
must have been planning on returning to Gecko on my way back to
Arroyo to complete the last quests there, but I never did.

Instead for now I rode in the direction of Broken Hills. I actually
thought of going to New Reno initially, but decided to actually get a
power fist in Broken Hills first. It proved to be a prudent decision
later. I thanked God when the zombie under my car told me that he
isn't hurt, and just broken a few limbs. A horrible catastrophe
avoided! I went straight to Eric to tell him the good news. Instead
of rejoicing for my new friend, Eric kept complaining about cooling.
I helped in exchange for some pills. According to his advice went to
Francis. Used my skills acquired during my days as a slaver to offer
him some "free" amphetamines, waited 10 minutes for the mutant to
become weak and sluggish from withdrawal and ate doping myself. I
must have paid the Olympic committee more bribes than Francis because
they allowed me to walk away with a power fist. Talked to Marcus and
Jacob, took all their quests, wondering in the meantime what to do
with all these idiots. Brought a talking plant to the house of the
old ghouls, did some tasks for Typhon, while outsmarting a very smart
scorpion. Eventually found Typhon's stash of bottle caps, stole the
porn mag back from him as a punishment and went into yet another set
of lavatory-caves. There I discovered corpses of the missing people,
described the scene in detail to a grieving husband, told Zaius that
he is a terrible person and ordered Francis to leave the town. With
my newfound knowledge that mutants *are* a thread of society I
adopted racialism, rescued Mason and Franc from prison, told Zaius
that I am going to fix his air purifier, actually blew it up. With
the knowledge that now free of the international mutantry Broken
Hills will grow into a great and powerful Broken Reich, colonising
all the lands to the east, I left the town.

As I arrived to New Reno I initiated dialogue with Jules just to tell
him to shut up and instead looted Jesus Mordino's casino before
taking a job from him. Now, here's another question: why does taking
this job takes the player character straight to the "stables"? Can't
it just mark those on the map? Anyway, the stables are pretty boring
this time around. I just told Ramirez what a buffoon he is before
delivering his poison and stole a few things from Myron. Back at New
Reno I discovered that somebody stole my car. I'd verbally abused
Jules until he showed me the place. I solved the situation by buying
my own car back and getting it upgraded. After I reported back to
Mordino he told me to get his tribute from the pornographers. The
issue here is that for some reason those guys refuse to talk to
slavers, who aren't also adopted by one of the bosses, or have kicked
enough people at the boxing ring, so instead I took a quest from
Mordino's rival Salvatore, stole batteries from him and his goons and
started working on getting a more powerful unarmed weapon. The thing
about it is that the "mega power" fist is not actually that much
better than a normal one, but it is very tricky to get normally. So
instead I decided to do what I don't do normally and get my weapons
upgraded for free by the madmad beneath the New Reno arms. Once that
was done I became a boxer, beat up all the other boxers, got the
tribute from pornographers, delivered it to Mordino, completed all
the Salvatore's quests, poisoned his air, killed all his goons,
reported to Mordino and made him choke on nuka cola. After that I was
still lacking one porn mag for miss Kitty, so I fornicated with mr.
Bishop's wife, and robbed the family of their possessions.
Unfortunately I was unable to disarm the trap on mr. Bishop's own
safe, so I had to hide under his bed. I also wanted to plant my own
trap on it, but found myself unable to do that either. In the end I
just walked by Bishop back to his casino.

This is another bug, actually. Walking two tiles past the door is
supposed to trigger dialogue, out of which there'll be no escape
other than through dozens of corpses or chickening out of the
building. Well, it didn't. Another bug that I first noticed at New
Reno, and which would become more and more annoying as the game
progressed is that sometimes performing attacks or interacting with
items would segfault the game (but not the other times, so it
probably has to do with faulty (re)allocation, or randomness).

At NCR I first and foremost talk to the local punk, who offered me to
guard my car, in exchange for which I offered him a rude gesture. NCR
is pretty weird. Entrance to NCR is a bit weird: it seems to be the
only place in the world with a newly-build parking slot for cars.
Just one. Actually some dialogue in fallout 2 would suggest that
there are at least a few car-drivers in the area. How come it's not
explored further? Anyway, what I gave the local bum 1000$ to work on
my car, took quests from the slavers and the mafia and entered the
city in the morning. Entering the city I was a bit surprised that the
sheriff offered me a job for Westin. Instead of doing this right now,
I stole some papers from a local researcher, stole maps from the
rangers, killed a suicidal policeman, killed a cultist (while
sneaking) and kicked the president's son a few times in the eyes,
breaking his nose thus, took the quest from the president and
completed the one for Westin. I didn't invest into outdoorsmanship,
so failed to discover the vault 13. Returning to NCR I handed the
papers I acquired earlier to Merk and bought a disc with the fake
13's location, discovered it's a fake, killed Merk for refusing to
give me a refund.

I went to the vault 15, one of my least favourite locations (I've
actually been thinking about just buying the map from the doctor, but
ended up a little short on money). Rescued a local woman's daughter
from raiders and went underground. There I sneaked past the guards on
the first level, which turned out to be pretty useless, as the
computer room's guards noticed me anyway. I thus learned of the vault
13's location and retrieved computer parts, but was forced to fight
my way back through the raiders. I didn't kill Darion because both I
and probably my character considered him to be too tough.

After giving Tandi her parts (and not exposing the spy because I
didn't know that there was one) I was finally able to arrive to the
actual vault 13. I attacked the deathclaws on sight, retrieving the
GECK at the end, thus proving genocide to be viable solution to any
problem.


THE END

I went back to Arroyo in an almost straight line after the village
-idiot- shaman called me. Then I realised that I still don't have
HtH evade, so instead of going to San Francisco rode to the
Experience Town of Redding. This is where I ran out of Salvatore's
batteries, so my adventures ended rather abruptly after I crashed
a dozen times fighting Frog Morton's goons, so instead I just
killed Frog himself and ran away with, like, four batteries left.

The Shi merchants turned out to be on the other level than myself:
selling all those tiny nuclear reactors and gauss rifles. Well,
what about small batteries? This is my least favourite location in
the game anyway. I took the quest from the brotherhood of steel guy,
arrived to Navarro, killed the guy in the front, went into the
facility via the tunnel, grabbed all the equipment I could find,
did the usual, got the commander's guard drunk, killed the commander,
looted his office, ran away.

Back south I saved a damsel in distress on a tanker, fixed the ship's
navigation while at it, got the damsel's boyfriend to get the fuel
from the Shi for me and went for the final dungeon.

Again during this section game seemed commited to not letting me win,
instead segfaulting on every 5th attack I made. Also the aliens and
floaters would often fail to initiate combat when I was walking right
by them.

There I encountered what I am pretty sure was a bug. I first tried to
get the people around the president drunk, get my sneak skill up and
kill him silently. I think it should have worked, but it didn't.
Somewhat disappointed I tried to blow him up: then I discovered that
somehow neither he, nor I take damage from explosions in our pants.
At last I was forced to commit murder by superstimpaks. Finished the
game by stuffing dynamite down the trousers of a researcher near the
reactor and having the turrets shoot Frank Horrigan to the death.
Once more the turrets didn't attack Horrigan immediately, though I am
quite sure they are supposed to.


FINAL BUGS?

I am pretty sure I didn't get all the ending slides I was supposed
to.


REFERENCES

[fallout2-ce] https://github.com/alexbatalov/fallout2-ce
