There used to be two larger lists: one programming books and the
second for other literature, where I put pretty much anything that'd
come to mind, while trying to avoid things that people would have
read anyway. I have since merged the two lists, and rewritten them to
list the books that left their mark on my brain: the sort of books I
sometimes re-read, or at least consider doing so.


PROGRAMMING

- The C programming language, 2nd ed. -

*The* book to learn C.

- The AWK programming language -

The name is very deceptive. awk(1) is known for being a very solid
tool for working with strings. There's a lot of that in the book. And
then there are implementations of some more known programs,
algorithms and little languages, including an assembly for a
fictional computer.

- The practice of programming -

Advice on programming pragmatically and effectively.

- Learning Perl -

It is what it says it is -- a decent introduction to Perl.

- Programming in Haskell, 2nd ed. -

Introductory Haskell book. Clear, concise and has good exercises.


FICTION

- H.P. Lovecraft -

Somehow everyone I recommend Lovecraft to seems to dislike his work.
I blame the translations. Lovecraft's use of the Engilsh language is,
perhaps, the most unique I've seen or heard. To anyone who, like me,
desperately looks for exactly that sort of things in his fiction, I
recommend Lovecraft wholeheartedly.

- The Flashman papers -

I think the book series is popular in Great Britain (at least), but
no one I've spoken to has ever heard of it. The series follows the
misadventures of an "anti-Arthurian" British cavalryman through some
significant (and some made-up) events of the Victorian era, German
unification, American civil war and other events of the period.
Probably only of much interest to people at least mildly interested
in history.

- The divine comedy -

On one hand, the divine comedy could be viewed as the worst kind of
political satire -- one written by members of one party to slander
the members of the other. On the other hand, there is genuine
religious concern for the health of one's soul: sin is condemned for
what it is, while virtue is rewarded. The divine comedy is a book of
great historic and philosophical significance.

- 1984 -

1984 is a "satire without humour". If Ingsoc satirises
social/political movements, Winston satirises such
"counter-movements". Orwell brings the us to hold contempt to
everyone involved: the party for its senseless totalitarianism,
Winston for his hatefulness, the proles for their ignorance. The
book reminds us of what we become when we accept madness as normalcy.


MISC

- Bible -

People who haven't read at least the Gospels are doing themselves a
huge disfavour. Especially those that identify themselves as
"atheists".

- gittutorial(7), gittutorial-2(7) & gitcore-tutorial(7) -

For years I couldn't understand Git, and somewhat hated it for that.
I tried to learn from the git(1) man page, man pages for individual
utilities, the official Web site, some books, even the
Internet-tutorials -- to no avail. Then I read gittutorial(7) and
some other pages it suggested, and it all "clicked" immediately.

- /usr/share/doc directory in 4.4BSD-lite2 (and earlier) -

Important things modern Unices fail to mention.
