I can name a few modern games that I thought were quite good. Most of
them, however, aren't. I have, however, played of quite a lot of
older games that are way better than anything that's being spat out
into Steam nowadays. The best way to play most of these games would
be by getting them from GOG, or sailing the Seven Seas should that
option no longer be available, as it is in some cases. Note that this
list will only contain games that I still regard to be commercial.
For the free games see my other article [free].

Just as the [free] list, this one will most likely be expanded in
the future, as I find that I play a lot less games now than I used
to, but when I do, it is usually something classical or libre.


FALLOUT 1 & 2

Once my sole two favourite games. They still hold a very special
place for me.

Before we go further, I should note that I am far from the only
person that noticed the two games' genius, which in the world of
commercial games unfortunately means that the thing became a
"franchise." "Franchise" is one of these strange words like
"commerce," whose literal definitions are completely neutral, but
whose responsibility for the sorry state of the world we live in
becomes apparent, once we examine how it is used in the context of
pseudo-propriety -- one that is immaterial, and only exists due to
the spread of some silly legal notions from Victorian Britain. And
in the context the meaning is following: a great many of
barely-related mediocre products are being inhumanly overprice
through the tactic of putting the word "Fallout" in the name and
changing the font.

As far as Fallout goes, I however, am interested mostly in the real
thing -- the first and second games. Of course, that is not to say
that there weren't any other games unfortunate enough to find
themselves part of a franchise that weren't all that bad. I actually
quite enjoyed Tactics and 3 the first time through, and completed
New Vegas many times, as it does constitute a bit more that some
surface relation with the thing it's named after combined with the
desire to sell. However, even the latter fails to bring the same
feelings as I have about the originals.

Now to my mind, Fallout is one of the few games that I became
attached to for reasons other than interesting gameplay. Rather I
have to say that the gameplay is not marvellous safe for one or two
qualities. Rather it is unique because every time I play I find
myself sucked into the illusion of controlling a character living in
a real world. That's not to say it at all makes sense! the plots for
both the main quest and the side-quests are rather basic, even the
most well-understood areas of physics are constantly contradicted and
there is quite a bit of paranormal along with the fourth wall breaks.
(and no, the second game is not the only one that suffers from it!)
However, once those things are dismissed, one does begin to
appreciate how this world functions: visiting each settlement, the
player discovers that just like the human settlements it does have
an economy, law, crime, science, culture, infrastructure and all the
other features of human settlements, however brutal and primitive at
times. The player further discovers that all those settlements are
interconnected: in the first game there is already a lot of trade and
some warfare going on, and in the second many settlements form
polities, and so often establish the more political relationships.
In all that, the player's character is not a mere observant, but a
participant: the fate of many such societies depends on the player's
actions, and sometimes the same decision alters the history of
several.

The gameplay, as I alluded, is not crazy, but it's not all that
terrible either. It all starts with building the character. When I
first played I was probably very impressed by the amount of different
specialisations my character could take. Now, however, I know that
there is a large part of these choices that is completely useless and
never comes up. Still, what does come up does so frequently and
allows the player to solve the quests he or she is given in many new
ways, usually the expected ones. There are also some things that
don't require any special input of in-game experience points, but
rather that of the player's attention. There are many options for
instance where wearing different clothes might result in different
reactions from the characters, or there are quite a few things that
can be solved with explosives.

And then there is also combat, which many people seem to not enjoy
that much, but in spite of it being clunky on the surface, I do think
that it is a bit more nuanced than people give it due. Largely this
is because Fallout might be the only game I've played where missing
is made fun. Misfired shots have a great possibility of landing on
another target. Allies are often killed by accident. There are the
critical misses where the unfortunate character may drop his weapon,
hit himself (to the death, possibly), or maim one of his limbs.
Overall, combat in Fallout is not very technically impressive, but
it is definitely not boring.


DEUS EX

Deus Ex is yet another game that had the misfortune of becoming a
franchise. I think only of the first two games to be much enjoyable
(even though many will disagree with me on the second), and only the
original to be worth returning to.

I consider Deus Ex to be one of the best designed games I've ever
played. It differs from most games -- even the other "immersive sims"
I've played in that instead of presenting the player with a set of
options on how to solve a particular problem, but instead presents
him or her with a set of instruments and asks the player to instead
figure just it out, whichever way seems to be the best. What's even
more interesting is that each time this set of tools will be
different not only because the player will find different general
items and invest into different skills, but also because unlike with
most such games, levelling is not done entirely through the experience
points. That is, in addition to the more traditional skills, there
are also nano-augmentations (i.e. with nanites), which are much more
interesting than normal skills, as they essentially give the
protagonist super-powers. There is, however, a catch: the set of
augmentations that the player will be able to take depends entirely
on the augmentation-canisters that he will be able to find. Many such
canisters are also applied to the same part of body, limiting the set
still further. All of it makes each playthrough actually unique even
in spite the seemingly linear plot and set of missions.


ARCANUM: OF STEAMWORKS AND MAGICK OBSCURA

After the first Fallout was released, some of the main people that
worked on it had some disagreements on what Fallout 2 should be like,
so they left to create their own studio named "Troika Games," and
quite aptly proceeded to make three games before running out of
money. The other two are somewhat interesting as well, but their
first project Arcanum is what really impressed me. If I were to
describe the game in one sentence, I'd say something along the lines
of "A bigger Fallout in a different setting and without the
misfortune of becoming a franchise."

So, the first point is that the game is much bigger than Fallout. By
that I mean that the world-map is huge and has more than a few
locations that are never pointed out, which the player can only find
by randomly coming across them. Another thing that I mean is that the
local maps are now so great that there is even a special mechanic that
allows the player to place waypoints and allow the character to
automatically follow them. I should say that normally I would
consider this to be a sign of bad things to come, as such huge maps
are usually only so huge because they are filled with void. Somehow,
however, Troika has managed to avoid this trap, and instead make the
world both grand and interesting at the same time.

Then there is the setting. I usually don't talk much about settings
in anything, as there is mostly not much to talk about. And I
specifically dislike that vile notion of "lores." I mean, supposedly
the word used to mean something, and if one opens a dictionary, one
could probably still find a sensible definition, but at this point
the mere utterance of the word makes my brain go into the automatic
mode for half an hour. In spite of that, I do think that what Arcanum
presents is a rather unique setting, not found elsewhere, and is
worth at least mentioning. Like the name suggests, the game is set in
a Tolkienite world during an industrial revolution. Even in real life
the industrial revolution was a strange time: technological marvels
and definite improvements in some areas of life went side-by-side
with pseudoscience, destruction and radicalism that plague mankind
to this very day. Strangely enough, a fantasy setting seems to be
ideal for highlighting those issues: our pseudoscience actually has
some backing in Arcanum, but is it right to act on it? Entire
civilisations are being destroyed in pursuit of questionable goals.
Senseless bickering between the traditional magicians and the more
progressive technologist leaves no room for cooperation and
co-existence.

Finally there is the gameplay. It's mostly fine. The
character-building shows that the game is made by the same people
that made Fallout, and it works very well. Combat on the other hand
is pretty terrible. And there are also a lot of things that can only
be done through some badly-thought-out keyboard shortcuts that cannot
be reassigned to something more sensible.


THE WITCHER 1

When people talk about the witcher games, it's usually about the
second or the third game (or the fourth one, which I hear is being
developed). Neither of those, however ever interested me too much.
The Witcher 1 on the other hand seems to be a game that people have
to "force" themselves to play. I never experienced such problems, but
my idea of a good game is quite different.

And the game really is very strange. I've heard once it being
described as a game that can be completed with one toe on the
keyboard, and that is not too far from the truth either. Gameplay,
however, is not what attracted me to this game so much. Strangely
enough, it was the writing. I do say that it is strange, and that is
because I found that most people who spend their time "seriously"
discussing the quality of writing in games are mostly the sort of
ignoramuses that don't ever take time to read a book. Thus in most
cases when I discuss writing in a game, I merely say that it is good
for a game, and proceed to the more important parts. The Witcher 1,
however, is the only game about which I can say that I found the
writing to be pretty solid in the general sense -- definitely more
solid than 90% of film-writing, and people are somehow enjoying that!
Indeed, the writing was so more than passable that it was much thanks
to the game that I actually looked into the books, which were to this
day the only piece of literature that I didn't regret reading in
translation.


TOMB RAIDER 1-5

Tomb Raider is another game I liked mostly due to the very good
gameplay. And it did manage to produce 5 good games, which is pretty
impressive. Unfortunately, the games beyond that are barely at all
related and aren't very much worth playing.

The games' gameplay consists primarily of the three activities:
solving puzzles, jumping around places and shooting things. I'll
start with the jumping around because platforming is not what I
generally enjoy in games: usually the activity is either very
RNG-dependant, which makes it very frustrating, or very automated
to the point where it feels that the player's input almost doesn't
matter at all. Tomb Raiders avoid that by making every move Lara (the
protagonist is one lady Lara Croft for those that lived in the woods
for the past several decades) makes extremely predictable.
Platforming in Tomb Raider does require careful planning, attention,
precision and timing, but no luck, which is how I grew to like it.

Puzzles are, I'd say, mostly pretty decent. There were a few that
were simpler to brute-force than to come up with a "real" solution,
a few whose logic didn't make much sense, and a few rather
frustrating ones where Lara has to escape some labyrinth by pushing
blocks, while being completely blind to the maze's general structure,
but those were in the minority.

Shooting is quite honestly pretty bad. For me at least most of the
shooting involved holding down control (shoot) and alt (jump), while
pressing left and right alternatively so that Lara would sideflip
instead of jumping vertically, still facing the enemy, but avoiding
some of the attacks. There were, however, some improvements in the
fourth and fifth games, as they presented both some weapons and some
enemies with the more unique behaviour that required a different
approach.

Of all the five the first was probably the best game: just the right
amount of platforming and puzzling with being assaulted by
(near-)extinct animals in-between. Unfortunately, of the remaining
only the fourth once again capitalised on that idea with the fifth
consisting of rather diverse "mini-campaigns," which are also very
enjoyable. My opinion on the second and third is a bit more mixed:
both are very well made, but still shift the focus away from puzzling
and platforming in the direction of shooting various mafiosos and the
like. And shooting is by far the worst of the three chief activities!


REFERENCES

[free] gopher://manpager.net/0/art/free.txt
