Revolution Software has made a few interesting games, some of which
I played. I think I might have played Broken Sword once as a child,
but more thoroughly I familiarised myself with them only much later
beginning a bit before I started writing my bachelor's diploma and
ending some time later (I think at least). My recollections of them
are a bit hazy now that some months have passed, but I'll try to give
at least a brief overview of my thoughts about the games.

So, what's so interesting about these games? Well, not they
themselves: I found them to be rather forgettable, actually. What's
more interesting is that four of them: Lure of the Temptress, Beneath
a Steel Sky & Broken Sword 1 & 2 can be played via ScummVM, which is
an open-source engine for many adventure games. More interestingly,
the first two (not "Swords" unfortunately) have their data files
distributed gratis for non-commercial purposes as well. It's a shame
the original engines never got open-sourced, but from the other angle
this can be viewed as "better than Doom", which still can't be played
without either buying the necessary data, or sharing it.

As for the reason why they are so forgettable, consider that there
are generally two types of games: the more classical ones not unlike
adventure(6) itself, which give the player some game rules and set
him loose to figure it all out for himself, and the games which try
to be films. Most of the latter adventure-games, including the ones
by Revolution are in the latter category. I very rarely watch films,
and when I do it's mostly Monty Python or something. The reason is
that unlike books or any "interactive" activities films do not
require intellectual involvement, instead they promote staleness of
the mind: they are very much like sleeping without actually getting
the benefits of doing so. The "game-films" are slightly better in
this aspect, as they do require at least some involvement from the
player. Furthermore the "adventure-games" are even better off in this
aspect, as the player is usually required to perform some creative
thinking in order to solve the game's puzzles, rather than to do
something mechanical. Still, the majority of it has been arranged by
the "director" and the player is the "audience".

Oh, well, here go the games themselves.


LURE OF THE TEMPTRESS

I don't really think much of this game and the reasons I dislike it
seem to align exactly with the features it was marketed for, which is
hilarious.

So, firstly, almost none of the characters ever remain in a
predictable position, instead they go around the entire map in a
randomised manner. This makes it an unnecessarily hard job to find
the one, which has to be talked to in order to progress the
storyline. This is worsened further by the fact that at times the
player is not given so much as a clue on what to do next, and so he
has to talk to every character in the game in order to find out. That
last deficiency is also combined with the fact several times
throughout the game things simply happen without the player being
given a hint, like a door that was closed the majority of the time
suddenly opening for no reason in particular.

My last grudge is the UI. "Temptress" was one of the earliest games
to use an entirely mouse-based interface, yet just like all those
graphical file-managers it did so relying on the textual idioms.
Basically the player often has to find-and-click a single verb from
a couple dozen and then do the same with nouns. The vast majority are
quite simply unused.

Oh, well, I suppose the characters and graphics are charming.


BENEATH A STEEL SKY

Now, this is a much better game. I'll say as much: of all the
adventure games I've played only this one made any sense. Clues are
simple enough to come by and the solution that follows mostly makes
sense. Things don't just happen off-screen and there aren't many
one-off mechanics. Very solid.


BROKEN SWORD 1 & 2

These games people are probably more familiar with than the other
two. Personally, I liked "Sky" more. It seems that people generally
find more problems with the game's puzzles than I did, which is as
much as can be said for the gameplay. They did make some good work on
the animations, so well done there. Other than that, however, I found
the games to be pretty average.


Copyright (c) 2023 Alexander Arkhipov <aa@alearx.org>
Licensed under CC BY (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0)
